<!-- Page 1 -->

A view from data science
Anna Sapienza1
and Sune Lehmann2
Abstract
For better and worse, our world has been transformed by Big Data. To understand digital traces generated by individuals,
we need to design multidisciplinary approaches that combine social and data science. Data and social scientists face the
challenge of effectively building upon each other’s approaches to overcome the limitations inherent in each side. Here, we
offer a “data science perspective” on the challenges that arise when working to establish this interdisciplinary environ-
ment. We discuss how we perceive the differences and commonalities of the questions we ask to understand digital beha-
viors (including how we answer them), and how our methods may complement each other. Finally, we describe what a
path toward common ground between these ﬁelds looks like when viewed from data science.
Keywords
Interdisciplinary approach, social data science, digital behavior
This article is a part of special theme on Machine Anthropology. To see a full list of all articles in this special theme, please click here:
https://journals.sagepub.com/page/bds/collections/machineanthropology
Introduction
A slice of big data
Within a very compressed time period, the world has been
transformed by Big Data. Technological advances have
allowed the aggregation of enormous stores of informa-
tion describing our digital behavior (Lazer et al.,2009),
but with big data also other elements come into play:
variety, velocity, and value (Dumbill,2012; Gantz and
Reinsel,2011). Here, we discuss how differences in
methodologies can impact the way these forms of data
shape new understanding of individual behaviors and
societies.
Getting to the transdisciplinary future
Behavioral data present an opportunity to build rich
models of individuals and answer new research questions
which were previously unanswerable because we simply
did not have data. To draw the maximal beneﬁt from
new data sources, therefore, we need to invent new
questions alongside new methods. We need to build trans-
disciplinary approaches merging social science (SS) and
data
science
(DS)
instead
of
complementing
them
(Blok and Pedersen,2014). Until then, data and social scien-
tists face the challenge of effectively building upon each
other’s approaches to overcome the limitations inherent to
each ﬁeld and capture the full potential of big data.
Long collaborations
In our experience working in an interdisciplinary environ-
ment,1 a key step is fostering long-lasting collaborations.
Trust and patience are important to connect the expertise
of ﬁelds that often look down on one another and care pas-
sionately about very different questions. It takes time to
establish a common ground of shared questions and scien-
tiﬁc values on which this collaboration builds.
When envisioning social data science (SDS), data and
social scientists share the goal of developing a ﬁeld that
1Copenhagen Center for Social Data Science, University of Copenhagen,
Denmark
2Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, Technical
University of Denmark, Denmark
Corresponding author:
Anna Sapienza, Copenhagen Center for Social Data Science, University of
Copenhagen. Nørregade 10, 1165 Copenhagen, Denmark.
Email: ansa@sodas.ku.dk
Creative Commons Non Commercial CC BY-NC: This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution-
NonCommercial 4.0 License (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/) which permits non-commercial use, reproduction and
distribution of the work without further permission provided the original work is attributed as speciﬁed on the SAGE and Open Access page (https://us.
sagepub.com/en-us/nam/open-access-at-sage).
Commentary
Big Data & Society
July–December: 1–6
© The Author(s) 2021
Article reuse guidelines:
sagepub.com/journals-permissions
DOI: 10.1177/20539517211040198
journals.sagepub.com/home/bds

---

<!-- Page 2 -->

uses vast and complex data to study social and digital beha-
viors in situ and design models capable of inferring patterns
from that data. Patterns that we need to interpret through the
lens of social theories, by considering behavior as part of
the cultural environment where it occurs (Shah et al.,2015).
The devil is in the details
We believe that part of the difﬁculty in building partner-
ships is related to which questions each ﬁeld ﬁnds interest-
ing. The ﬁrst challenge, therefore, is to ﬁnd concrete
questions that are relevant to and publishable within differ-
ent ﬁelds.
Here, we offer a DS perspective on the challenges arising
when trying to establish the interdisciplinary ﬁeld of SDS,
by discussing: how we experience differences and com-
monalities of the questions we ask; how DS perceives dif-
ferences
in
methods
and
how
they
can
potentially
complement each other; and paths toward common
ground between the ﬁelds.
The questions, their answers, and how we
talk about them
Disciplinary audiences are the norm
Although many ﬁelds share similar goals, speciﬁc research
questions are different across ﬁelds. We do not generate
knowledge in an abstract way. We write papers. Papers
with disciplinary audiences and standards of evaluation
developed within specialized journals. Currently, interdis-
ciplinary research has no common evaluation criteria and
often encounters challenges in ﬁnding funding (Bromham
et al.,2016), getting papers accepted and cited in the short-
term (Wang et al.,2017). Given that scientiﬁc achievements
are mainly measured via factors, such as the h-index, these
issues are tied to the researcher’s career perspective and
form a strong incentive to favor disciplinary audiences.
Thus, to publish a paper, SDS researchers must choose a
disciplinary venue, which implies choosing questions that
are relevant to a disciplinary audience. Yet, as a rule, com-
puter science questions (e.g., developing powerful algo-
rithms, performance benchmarks, etc.), are not interesting
to SS journals and vice versa. This is a key problem for
moving forward.
Finding good questions as data scientists
DS is not quite computer science, so let us be a bit more spe-
ciﬁc about how we think about identifying questions. As
social scientists, data scientists are interested in describing
behaviors. But what are the differences? As data scientists,
we start from large datasets and search for questions in
much the same way that natural scientists ask questions
about nature. Our criterion is that ﬁndings must be
surprising/interesting/non-trivial, but yet supported in a
rigorous statistical sense by the data we are studying.
The secret trick (we believe) is that alongside the ques-
tions, we search for the variables deﬁning the questions.
As pointed out by Milner (2018), identifying the right vari-
ables is essential to the Natural Sciences. Milner uses
Newton as an example. The genius of Newton was not
the mathematical theory, but that he (within the entire
natural world) identiﬁed the variables which connect the
behavior of apples falling to the ground with planetary
motion: force and momentum.
Thus, we explore large datasets as someone from the
natural sciences explores the physical world. This means
that we are not hypothesis-driven in the sense of many
SSs (more below). As we explore the data, we form infor-
mal theories of what might be driving the patterns we see.
We learn what the right questions (and variables) are.
Brockmann et al. (2006) provide an example of this
process. Here, the authors departed from the established
norms of understanding travel behaviors, by looking at
dollar bills movements. They realized that mobility could
be understood via two newly deﬁned variables: scale-free
jumps and long waiting times between displacements.
Identifying these variables opened up new questions regard-
ing the description of travel patterns that had not been
explored previously—exploration that is possible without
p-hacking (Head et al.,2015).
What do SS methods look like to us?
We start with the caveat we understand that there are philo-
sophical and methodological chasms dividing SSs. We
cannot address everything here, so we mainly discuss a sim-
pliﬁed “hypothesis-driven research” (which is (a) not the
norm in all SSs and (b) not exclusive to the SSs). But the
hypothesis-driven paradigm (and its deductive nature) pre-
sents a useful contrast to the described natural/DS approach.
Hypothesis-driven research tends to appear when things
are complicated. Milner uses biology as an example, but we
believe it can be extended to some SSs, for example, quan-
titative research in sociology, psychology, political science,
and economics:
Researchers in those ﬁelds study complicated, irreducible
systems (living organisms), have limited experimental
probes, and are often forced to work with small data sets.
Unavoidably, the most common experimental protocol in
these ﬁelds is to poke at a complex living system by
giving it a drug or chemical and then measuring some indir-
ectly related response. Those experiments live and die by
the statistical test.
Milner (2018)
A clear example of this experimental design is the prac-
tice of preregistration, which is becoming predominant
2
Big Data & Society

---

<!-- Page 3 -->

especially in psychology, economics, and political science.
When research is preregistered, not only the questions/
hypotheses need to be speciﬁed but also the variables and
tests. As exempliﬁed by Milner’s quote, this approach is
sometimes necessary, but it eventually limits the explor-
ation, especially when large datasets are available.
Another “locking in” of variables and questions can
occur when social scientists work in a highly theory-driven
way and frame their work in terms of traditional “big ques-
tions” (Giles et al.,2011) and paradigms (Burrell and
Morgan,2017). In sociology, examples of big questions
are as follows2:
• To what extent is the individual shaped by society?
• To what extent does our social class background,
gender, or ethnicity affect our life chances?
• What is the role of institutions in society?
When using theory and hypothesis-driven approaches,
ﬁnding the data to answer a speciﬁc question becomes
central. But predeﬁned questions frame the variables,
thus, limiting the way information is extracted from large
datasets.
Talking about ﬁndings
Another cultural difference relates to how we talk about
ﬁndings. As data scientists, an important criterion for
quality
and
impact
is
generalizability
(Lee
and
Baskerville,2003). As any research on human beings, in
one sense, DS ﬁndings are highly speciﬁc to the dataset
under study. Nevertheless—perhaps because we are often
revealing new variables to measure and care about—data
scientists often declare ﬁndings to be highly general. To
give a concrete example, the following paper is entitled
“Fundamental structures of dynamic social networks”
(Sekara et al.,2016). A more general title than “How We
Tweet About Coronavirus, and Why: A Computational
Anthropological
Mapping
of
Political
Attention
on
Danish Twitter during the COVID-19 Pandemic” (Breslin
et al.,2020), even though the data used in both works is
based on a subset of the Danish population. We have
learned, through our collaborations with social scientists,
that this tendency can be an annoyance to some.
Are data scientists then bullshitters?
Despite this difference in communication, we argue that
data scientists do not just over-hype their results.
Firstly, DS brings to the table the capability to explore
very different, larger, and general datasets.3 Secondly,
applying methods from the natural sciences to social data,
can (e.g., through the “discovery” of new, interesting vari-
ables) identify new patterns to investigate across settings.
Let us take (Brockmann et al.,2006) as an example
again. The authors started by studying bank notes dispersal
through about 1M reports from a bill-tracking website.
They introduced the concept of displacement distributions,
which had previously not been studied. To show that this
concept was interesting beyond their initial dataset, they
extended their ﬁndings by exploring two additional
datasets.
Demands for immediate usefulness
Generalizability, however, does not imply the results to
have a practical and immediate application in real life.
Many SS outcomes (e.g., in economics) are subject to the
constraint of being immediately useful. When social scien-
tists are asked to inform policymakers, deﬁning one’s own
variables of interest is not an option. We have experienced
that working on these problems tends to shape how
researchers approach science altogether.4
Since DS researchers work to identify interesting pat-
terns, our “generalizable” outcomes can turn out to be
useless. They do, however, have the beneﬁt that if proven
useful, they can be powerful. Sometimes unexpected appli-
cations are discovered long after the exploration. Nowhere
is this more evident than with pure mathematics, where (ini-
tially useless) results from number theory have later formed
the basis of ubiquitous cryptographic protocols.
A trade-off
One can imagine a trade-off between research strategy and
results’ immediate impact. We show this idea in Figure 1.
On the one side, we ﬁnd ﬁelds such as physics and mathem-
atics, whose questions/variables are not predeﬁned and
whose results generalize to the entire known universe.
However, many results have no practical value, and when
they do, ﬁndings sometimes need decades to ﬁnd an appli-
cation. We provided the example of number theory but
there are many others: the theory of conic sections had no
practical purpose until Kepler found that they describe
planetary orbits; non-Euclidean geometry, formulated by
Riemann (among others), did not ﬁnd practical use until
Einstein used it to model the universe, etc.
On the other side, we locate areas whose approach, for
the reasons mentioned above (e.g., demands for highly spe-
ciﬁc answers, complexity combined with limited data,
theory-driven approaches, etc.), entails a more rigorous def-
inition of both questions and variables—parts of SS,
biology, and engineering. This connects to the idea of the
“purity” of sciences depicted in Figure 2.
We think that DS currently exists somewhere between
these extremes: we choose the variables and frame our
questions in relation to them. However, this freedom
comes at the cost of reducing the immediate practical use-
fulness of our results.
Sapienza and Lehmann
3

---

<!-- Page 4 -->

Ideally, the goal of any research ﬁeld is to understand the
world completely. To have full availability of fantastic data,
freedom to identify the variables to describe the world; to
design models and theories that are both general and of
immediate practical use. To hold the enviable positioning
at the top-right corner of Figure 1 (in red). This sketch is
not a deeply considered view of all science, but rather a
jumping-off point for thinking about how now data and
the combination of SS and DS practices can provide new
chances to optimize the trade-off.
Wrapping up
Moving forward
We have attempted to describe some of the problems that
arise when collaborating within SDS: How—due to differ-
ent traditions and audiences—data and social scientists are
trained to provide different styles of answers when design-
ing their research and writing papers. Now, we describe
how we see the road going forward.
Shared questions and methods
We believe that the road ahead lies in collaborating to
combine methods at scale to ﬁnd deeper, and more
general answers from high-resolution data. Perhaps data
will allow to identify new and powerful variables for SS.
To understand these data, we need to combine data
sources providing both the behavior and the perception of
it. Moreover, we need to rely on the expertise of data scien-
tists in identifying the important variables. And we need
social scientists to providing a theoretical explanation
driving the observed behavioral patterns. This combination
Figure 1. Trade-off between the research approach and the practical use of ﬁndings.
Figure 2. The comic “Purity” (https://xkcd.com/435/). CC
Non-Commercial 2.5 License.
4
Big Data & Society

---

<!-- Page 5 -->

of data and approaches will also help reframe our questions
into a shared view involving how and why different social
behaviors occur. Neither ﬁeld can meet these challenges
alone.
Building bridges
It is not just within a methodology that we can ﬁnd common
ground. We started this essay by noting that until we form
new disciplines, collaborations need time. We have experi-
enced that, over time, perhaps we can also ﬁnd new and
shared questions and answers. To collaborate across disci-
plines, beyond combining different methods, we need to
know each other well enough to discuss freely. We need
to understand each other’s worlds well enough to get over
the existing gap between approaches and look for variables,
questions, datasets, and answers that everyone ﬁnds inter-
esting. There are many ways this can be done. One we
have found is to simply bring someone along for the
paper. We have experienced brilliant and creative ideas
from including an anthropologist in the data exploration
of a typical DS project or having a data scientist join a
group of social scientists analyzing electronic question-
naires and free text data. More generally, we have to con-
sider the research process itself. It is not only the
differences in questions and approaches, but also the differ-
ences in scientiﬁc practices. We think that practical experi-
ence is a good way of building this type of experience.
Interdisciplinarity is necessary
As we approach a transdisciplinary future, we need to make
it through the ﬁrst wave of interdisciplinary collaborations.
To understand ever-growing data streams, we genuinely
believe that a new breed of transdisciplinary researchers is
necessary. “[T]he large datasets that describe the inner
workings of complex social systems [ …] cannot be
adequately understood from a single disciplinary perspec-
tive” (Chang et al.,2014). The amount of data, currently
available to investigate digital behaviors, cannot be ana-
lyzed without DS and machine learning methods and
cannot be fully understood without social theories linking
the motivation behind actions to the observed behavior.
To get there, we must already now start creating an infra-
structure that rewards collaboration across ﬁelds via new jour-
nals and funding schemes. We need editorial boards and
funding bodies withinterdisciplinary backgrounds—who rec-
ognize that interdisciplinarity is difﬁcult and takes time. Now
is the time to set the stage for how and where this transdisci-
plinary research will be performed and published.
Declaration of conﬂicting interest
The authors declared no potential conﬂicts of interest with respect
to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.
Funding
The authors disclosed receipt of the following ﬁnancial support for
the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article: Paper
developed
under
DISTRACT—The
Political
Economy
of
Distraction in Digitized Denmark, funded by the ERC Advanced
Grant—Horizon 2020 (834540).
ORCID iDs
Anna Sapienza
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-0842-7987
Sune Lehmann
https://orcid.org/0000-0001-6099-2345
Notes
1. At the Center for Social Data Science—University of
Copenhagen.
2. Adapted
from
lhttps://revisesociology.com/2017/08/08/big-
questions-a-level-sociology/.
3. Large-scale datasets have many shortcomings relative to trad-
itional SS data-types as questionnaires. For a discussion of
these topics, we recommend (Salganik,2019).
4. SSs are not a coherent single area of science. Similarly, a strong
focus on usefulness is present in engineering, thus there is more
nuance to this story than we have room for here.
References
Blok A and Pedersen MA (2014) Complementary social science?
Quali-quantitative experiments in a big data world. Big Data &
Society 1(2): 2053951714543908.
Breslin SD, Enggaard TR, Blok A, et al. (2020) How we tweet
about coronavirus, and why: A computational anthropological
mapping of political attention on Danish Twitter during the
covid-19 pandemic. In: The COVID-19 Forum III. University
of St. Andrews, volume 18.
Brockmann D, Hufnagel L and Geisel T (2006) The scaling laws
of human travel. Nature 439(7075): 462–465.
Bromham L, Dinnage R and Hua X (2016) Interdisciplinary
research has consistently lower funding success. Nature
534(7609): 684–687.
Burrell G and Morgan G (2017) Sociological paradigms and
organisational analysis: Elements of the sociology of corpor-
ate life. Abingdon: Routledge.
Chang RM, Kauffman R J and Kwon Y (2014) Understanding the
paradigm shift to computational social science in the presence
of big data. Decision Support Systems 63: 67–80.
Dumbill E (2012) Planning for Big Data. Sebastopol: O’Reilly.
Gantz J and Reinsel D (2011) Extracting value from chaos. IDC
iview 1142(2011): 1–12.
Giles J et al. (2011) Social science lines up its biggest challenges.
Nature 470(7332): 18–9.
Head ML, Holman L, Lanfear R, et al. (2015) The extent and con-
sequences of p-hacking in science. PLoS Biology 13(3):
e1002106.
Lazer D, Pentland AS, Adamic L, et al. et al. (2009) Life in the
network: The coming age of computational social science.
Science (NY) 323(5915): 721.
Lee AS and Baskerville R L (2003) Generalizing generalizability
in
information
systems
research.
Information
Systems
Research 14(3): 221–243.
Sapienza and Lehmann
5

---

<!-- Page 6 -->

Milner S (2018) Newton didn’t frame hypotheses. why should
we?. Physics Today.
Salgnaik MJ (2019) Bit by bit: Social research in the digital age.
Oxfordshire: Princeton University Press.
Sekara V, Stopczynski A and Lehmann S (2016) Fundamental
structures of dynamic social networks. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America 113(36): 9977–9982.
Shah DV, Cappella JN and Neuman WR (2015) Big data, digital
media, and computational social science: Possibilities and
perils. The Annals of the American Academy of Political and
Social Science 659(1): 6–13.
Wang
J,
Veugelers
R
and
Stephan
P
(2017)
Bias
against novelty in science: A cautionary tale for users
of
bibliometric
indicators.
Research
Policy
46(8):
1416–1436.
6
Big Data & Society